Aim The project’s primary aim is to improve the scope of human and computer interaction by developing an effective alternative way of controlling the mouse pointer and its various functions such as left click, right click, scroll up, scroll down and selection. It helps user interact with the computer from a considerable distance without any issue and efficiently without actually touching the mouse. It also decreases the hardware requirement for the interaction by eliminating the necessity of a mouse. All the user needs is a web camera (which is mostly present in all laptops these days) which can record real-time videos. 2.2 Objective The main objectives of the project are as follows: - a. Obtain input video feed b. Retrieve useful data from the image to be used as input c. Filter the image and identify different colors. d. Track the movement of colors in the video frame. e. Implement it to the mouse interface of the computer according to predefined notions for mouse pointer control. 3. Methodology

3.1 Framework Architecture The algorithm for the entire system is shown in Figure below. Figure 2.1 Architecture In order to reduce the effects of illumination, the image can be converted to chrominance color space which is less sensitive to illumination changes. The HSV color space was chosen since it was found by to be the best color space for skin detection. The next step would be to use a method that would differentiate selected color pixels from non-color pixels in the image (color detection). Background subtraction was then performed to remove the face and other skin color objects in the background. Morphology Opening operation (erosion followed by dilation) was then applied to efficiently remove noise. A Gaussian filter was applied to smooth the image and give better edge detection. Edge detection was then performed to get the hand contour in the frame. Using the hand contour, the tip of the index finger was found and used for hand tracking and controlling the mouse movements. The contour of the hand was also used for gesture recognition.